STUDENT ENGAGEMENT AT SCHOOL
A SENSE OF BELONGING AND PARTICIPATION
RESULTS FROM PISA 2000
Jon Douglas Willms
OECD
ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT

FOREWORD
© OECD 2003 3
FOREWORD
Most students participate in academic and non-academic activities at school, and develop a sense of
belonging – their friends are there, they have good relations with teachers and other students, and they
identify with and value schooling outcomes. But many students are not engaged. They do not believe their
school experience has much bearing on their future, and they do not feel accepted by their classmates or
teachers. Gradually these students withdraw from school life, and become disaffected from school. Some
disaffected students are disruptive in class, and exert a negative influence on other students.
Can we meet the needs of students who have become disaffected from school? Can we identify schools
that have high levels of student engagement, and if so, what factors contribute to their success? What is
the relationship between student engagement and academic performance? These questions are of great
concern to educators around the world.
The OECD Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) offers a unique opportunity to study
student engagement across several countries as students approach the end of compulsory schooling. The
data collected in PISA include information on students’ attitudes and values, as well as reliable and valid
data on students’ literacy skills. The data also include information on students’ family backgrounds and
on several features of the schools they were attending. This report examines several questions concerning
students’ participation and sense of belonging. These two aspects of student engagement are considered
important, not only because of their relationship with student learning, but also because they represent a
disposition towards schooling and life-long learning.
The results indicate that there is considerable variation among countries in their levels of student engagement and in the prevalence of disaffected students. Moreover, the prevalence of disaffected students varies
considerably within and among schools within most countries, and this variation is not attributable solely
to students’ family background. The results also provide evidence that literacy performance and student
engagement do not necessarily go hand-in-hand; in most countries there is a significant number of students
with a strong literacy performance who are nevertheless disaffected from school. The analyses also identify some of the school factors related to engagement, and provide evidence that achieving strong student